Introduction
---
Philosophy’s history, as today’s students and teachers of philosophy see it, is a retrospective construct. It is chosen from the wider stream of the history of ideas in order to provide today’s philosophical concerns with their antecedents. This fact has to be noted if only to avoid confusion about the words ‘philosophy’ and ‘philosopher’ themselves. For almost all of its history ‘philosophy’ had the general meaning of ‘rational enquiry’, though from the beginning of modern times in the Renaissance until the nineteenth century it more particularly meant what we now call ‘science’, though a ‘philosopher’ was still someone who investigated anything and everything. Thus it is that King Lear says to Edgar, ‘First let me talk with this philosopher: What is the cause of thunder?’ On William Hazlitt’s tombstone, engraved in 1830, the famous essayist is described as ‘the first (unanswered) Metaphysician of the age’, because at that time what we now call ‘philosophy’ was called ‘metaphysics’ to distinguish it from what we now call ‘science’. This distinction was often marked by the labels ‘moral philosophy’ to mean what we now call ‘philosophy’, and ‘natural philosophy’ to mean what we now call ‘science’.

The word ‘scientist’ was coined as recently as 1833, giving the related word ‘science’ the sense it now familiarly has. After that date the words ‘philosophy’ and ‘science’ took on their current meanings, as the sciences diverged more and more from general enquiry by their increasing specialism and technicality.

In contemporary philosophy the principal areas of enquiry are epistemology, metaphysics, logic, ethics, aesthetics, the philosophy of mind, the philosophy of language, political philosophy, the history of debates in these areas of enquiry, and philosophical examination of the assumptions, methods and claims of other fields of enquiry in science and social science. Most of this is, and certainly the first three are, the staple of a study of philosophy at universities in the Anglophone world and in Europe today.

And correlatively, these are the fields of enquiry that determine which strands in the general history of ideas are selected as today’s ‘history of philosophy’, thus leaving aside the history of technology, astronomy, biology and medicine from antiquity onwards, the history of physics and chemistry since the seventeenth century, and the rise of the social sciences as defined disciplines since the eighteenth century.

To see what determines which strands in the history of ideas to fillet out as ‘the history of philosophy’ we therefore need to look backwards through the lens of the various branches of contemporary philosophy as listed above, and this requires a preliminary understanding of what these branches are.

Epistemology or ‘theory of knowledge’ is enquiry into the nature of knowledge and how it is acquired. It investigates the distinctions between knowledge, belief and opinion, seeks to ascertain the conditions under which a claim to know something is justified, and examines and offers responses to sceptical challenges to knowledge.

Metaphysics is enquiry into the nature of reality and existence. What exists, and what is its nature? What is existence? What are the most fundamental kinds of being? Are there different kinds of existence or existing thing? Do abstract entities outside space and time, such as numbers and universals, exist in addition to concrete things in space and time such as trees and stones? Do supernatural entities such as gods exist in addition to the natural realm? Is reality one thing or many things? If humans are wholly part of the natural causal order of the universe, can there be such a thing as free will?

Metaphysics and epistemology are central to philosophy as a whole; they are, as it were, the physics and chemistry of philosophy; understanding the problems and questions in these two enquiries is basic to discussion in all other areas of philosophy.

Logic – the science of valid and sound reasoning – is the general instrument of philosophy, as mathematics is in science. In the Appendix I give a sketch of the basic ideas of logic and explain its key terms.

Ethics, as a subject in the philosophy curriculum, is enquiry into the concepts and theories of what is good, of right and wrong, of moral choice and action. The phrase ‘as a subject in the philosophy curriculum’ is employed here because the word ‘ethics’ has multiple applications. Even when used as the label of an area of philosophy it serves to denote two separable matters: examination of ethical concepts and reasoning – this is more precisely described as ‘metaethics’ – and examination of ‘normative’ moralities which seek to tell us how to live and act. Normative morality is distinguished from the more theoretical metaethical enquiry by describing normative morality as a ‘first order’ endeavour and metaethics as a ‘second order’ endeavour. By its nature philosophy is a second-order enquiry, so ‘ethics’ in the context of philosophical study standardly means metaethics.

But the word ‘ethics’ also, though relatedly, denotes the outlook and attitudes of individuals or organizations regarding their values, how they act and how they see themselves. This is a familiar and good use of the term; and – interestingly – reflection on this use shows that the words ‘ethics’ and ‘morals’ do not mean the same. This is easier to grasp when we note the etymologies of the terms: ‘ethics’ comes from the Greek ethos meaning ‘character’, whereas ‘morals’ derives from a coining by Cicero from the Latin mos, moris (plural mores) which means ‘custom’ and even ‘etiquette’. Morality, accordingly, is about our actions, duties and obligations, whereas ethics is about ‘what sort of person one is’, and although the two are obviously connected, they are equally obviously distinct. 

This distinction naturally appears in the arenas of metaethical and normative discussion too. In their identification of the locus of value, some metaethical theories focus on the character of the agent, others on the consequences of actions, others again on whether an action conforms to a duty. When it is the character of an agent that matters, we are discussing ethics in the sense of ethos just described; when it is the consequence of actions or conformity with duty that matters, it is the narrower focus of morality which is in view.

Aesthetics is enquiry into art and beauty. What is art? Is beauty an objective property of things natural or man-made, or is it subjective, existing in the eye of the beholder only? Can something be aesthetically valuable whether or not it is beautiful and whether or not it is a work of art? Are the aesthetic values of natural things (a landscape, a sunset, a face) different from those we attribute to artefacts (a painting, a poem, a piece of music)?

Philosophy of mind is the enquiry into the nature of mental phenomena and consciousness. It was once an integral part of metaphysics because the latter, in enquiring into the nature of reality, has to consider whether reality is only material, or in addition has non-material aspects such as mind, or perhaps is only mental as the ‘idealist’ philosophers argue. But as consensus has grown around the view that reality is fundamentally and exclusively material, and that mental phenomena are the products of the material activity of the brain, understanding those phenomena and in particular the nature of consciousness has become a topic of intense interest.

Philosophy of language is enquiry into how we attach meaning to sounds and marks in a way that enables communication and embodies thought, indeed perhaps makes thought above a certain rudimentary level possible in the first place. What is the unit of semantic meaning – a word, a sentence, a discourse? What is ‘meaning’ itself? What do we know – or know how to do – when we ‘know the meaning’ of expressions in a language? Is there such a thing as a language such as English, or are there as many idiolects of English as there are speakers of those idiolects, thus making a language in fact a collection of not completely overlapping idiolects? How do we interpret and understand the language-use of others? What are the epistemological and metaphysical implications of our understanding of language, meaning and language-use?

For good reasons the philosophies of mind and language have become conjoined into a single overall enquiry in more recent academic philosophy, as the titles of books and university courses ubiquitously attest.

Political philosophy is enquiry into the principles of social and political organization and their justification. It asks, What is the best way to organize and run a society? What legitimates forms of government? On what grounds do claims to authority in the state or a society rest? What are the advantages and disadvantages of democracy, communism, monarchy and other forms of political arrangement?

The history of philosophy as it is viewed backwards through the lens of the above enquiries is an essential part of philosophy itself, because all these enquiries have evolved over time as – so to speak – a great conversation among thinkers living in different centuries in different circumstances but nevertheless absorbed in the same fundamental questions; and therefore knowing the ‘case law’ of these debates is crucial to understanding them. This prevents us from unnecessarily reinventing the wheel over and over again, helps us to avoid mistakes and to recognize pitfalls, allows us to profit from our predecessors’ endeavours and insights, and gives us materials to use in trying to understand the subject matter at issue, and to frame the right questions to ask about them.

Philosophical examination of the assumptions, methods and claims of other fields of enquiry is what is meant by such labels as ‘philosophy of science’, ‘philosophy of history’, ‘philosophy of psychology’ and the like. Every enquiry rests on assumptions and employs methodologies, and self- awareness about these is necessary. Philosophical questions about science, for example, are asked by scientists themselves and not only by philosophers; philosophical questions about the study of history likewise are raised by historians in discussing their methods and aims. Consider each in turn more particularly, as follows.

Should science be understood in realist or in instrumentalist terms – that is, are the entities referred to by technical terms in science really existing things, or are they useful constructs that help to organize understanding of the phenomena being studied? Is scientific reasoning deductive or inductive? Is there such a thing as scientific knowledge or, on the understanding that all science is open to refutation by further evidence, should it be understood as a system of powerfully evidenced theories which are nevertheless intrinsically defeasible?

As regards history: if there is no evidence one way or the other for a claim about something that happened in the past, is the claim nevertheless definitely either true or false, or is it neither? History is written in the present on the basis of evidence – diaries, letters, archaeological remains – that has survived into the present (or so we judge): it is partial and fragmentary, and many of the past’s traces are lost; is there therefore such a thing as knowledge of the past at all, or is there only interpretative reconstruction at best – and perhaps, too often, just surmise?

Reflection on the kinds of enquiries, and kinds of questions those enquiries prompt, shows that philosophy is the attempt to make sense of things, to achieve understanding and perspective, in relation to those many areas of life and thought where doubt, difficulty, obscurity and ignorance prevail – which is to say: on the frontiers of all our endeavours. I describe the role of philosophy to my students as follows: we humans occupy a patch of light in a great darkness of ignorance. Each of the special disciplines has its station on an arc of the circumference of that patch of light, straining to see outwards into the shadows to descry shapes, and thereby to push the horizon of light a little further outwards. Philosophy patrols the whole circumference, making special efforts on those arcs where there is as yet no special discipline, trying to formulate the right questions to ask in order that there might be a chance of formulating answers.

This task – asking the right questions – is indeed crucial. Until the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, philosophers did not often enough ask the right questions in the right way about nature; when they did, the natural sciences were thereby born, developing into magnificent and powerful fields of enquiry which brought the modern world into existence. Philosophy thus gave birth to science in those centuries; in the eighteenth century it gave birth to psychology, in the nineteenth century to sociology and empirical linguistics, in the twentieth century it played important roles in the development of artificial intelligence and cognitive science. Its contributions to aspects of neuroscience and neuropsychology continue.

But the core of questions in epistemology, metaphysics, ethics, political philosophy, the ‘philosophy of’ pursuits, and the rest, remain; they are perennial and perennially urgent questions, because efforts to answer them are part of the great adventure of humanity’s effort to understand itself and its place in the universe. Some of those questions seem unanswerable – though to act on the thought that they are so is to give up far too soon. Moreover, as Paul Valéry said, Une difficulté est une lumière. Une difficulté insurmontable est un soleil: ‘A difficulty is a light. An insurmountable difficulty is a sun.’ Wonderful saying! for it teaches us that the effort to solve even the seemingly unsolvable teaches us an enormous amount – as the history of philosophy attests.

What follows, then, is the history of philosophy in today’s meaning of the word ‘philosophy’, showing how the subject matter of today’s philosophical enquiries began and evolved. It is mainly the history of Western philosophy that I describe in these pages, but I give overviews of Indian, Chinese and Arabic–Persian philosophy (and a consideration of philosophy in Africa) to note some connections and differences among the great traditions of thought: see the opening pages of Part V. In all cases I have of necessity focused on the main figures and ideas, and in the case of the non-Western traditions I write as a spectator observing from the other side of a linguistic barrier, having extremely little access to Sanskrit, Pali and ancient Chinese, and none to Arabic.

A difference between this and other histories of philosophy is that this one does not detour into what most others give, namely, accounts of the theologies of Augustine, some of the Church Fathers of early Christianity and the ‘Schoolmen’ of later medieval times such as Aquinas and Duns Scotus. This is a history of philosophy, not of theology and religion. An oddity of histories of philosophy which include theologians among the philosophers is that there is no better reason to include Christian theologians while excluding Jewish or Islamic ones; and no better reason to include theology in a history of philosophy than to include a history of science (indeed, there is rather more reason to include this latter). A fundamental difference between philosophy and theology is that philosophy is the enterprise of trying to make sense of ourselves and our world in a way which asks what we should think and why, whereas theology is the enterprise of exploring and expounding ideas about a certain kind of thing or things taken to exist actually or possibly, namely, a god or gods – a being or beings supposed to be different in significant and consequential ways from ourselves. As I write in dealing with this point in connection with Arabic–Persian philosophy in Part V, ‘if the starting point for reflection is acceptance of a religious doctrine, then the reflection that follows is theology, or theodicy, or exegesis, or casuistry, or apologetics, or hermeneutics, but it is not philosophy’: and that is the principle of demarcation I apply throughout.

A way of dramatizing the point more polemically is to say that philosophy is to theology what agriculture is to gardening: it is a very much bigger, broader and more varied enterprise than the particular, localized and focused one of ‘talking or theorizing about a god’ (which is what theo-logos means). Of course in philosophy the question whether supernatural entities or agencies exist, and what difference would follow for our picture of the world and ourselves if one or more did so, from time to time arises; and there are philosophers who, drawing on a conception of deity from ‘natural theology’ (that is, some general considerations about a supernatural mind or agency), use it to guarantee the possibility of knowledge (as Descartes did) or as a basis for existence (as Berkeley and not a few others did). These views are discussed in the appropriate places in the following pages. But the tangled efforts to make sense of something like deity as traditional religions wish to have it understood – omnipotent, eternal, omniscient being or beings, and so forth – is not except tangentially a fruitful part of the story of philosophy, and is left to its own historians therefore.